Reduce concept (#129)
exercism/jq: concepts/reduce/about.md

> # About

Reviewer: Given that this is a more complicated concept, I wonder if it makes sense to start with an example before giving the syntax and technical bits. Maybe start with the motivation? Something like this?

> Suppose we want to sum an array of numbers. In many languages, this is expressed as a loop with an accumulator variable. This can also be written as a recursive function, `def sum(x): (x | first) + sum(x | rest)`. This is a common pattern which can be described as a reducing function.

Author: > Given that this is a more complicated concept, I wonder if it makes sense to start with an example before giving the syntax and technical bits. Maybe start with the motivation? Something like this?
> 
> > Suppose we want to sum an array of numbers. In many languages, this is expressed as a loop with an accumulator variable. This can also be written as a recursive function, `def sum(x): (x | first) + sum(x | rest)`. This is a common pattern which can be described as a reducing function.

How about this:

---
> Suppose we want to sum an array of numbers. There are many ways to accomplish this goal.
> 
> - In many languages, this problem is expressed as a loop with an accumulator variable.
> - This problem can be written as a recursive function. In pseudo-code, this might look like
> 
>   ```none
>   function add(x, sum=0):
>     if x is empty
>       return sum
>     else
>       return add(rest(x), sum + first(x))
>   ```
> 
>   This method of dividing the problem into smaller pieces can also be described as "reducing towards the base case."
> 
> **Reduce** is a way to ...

Reviewer: This looks solid. Though I'm not a fan of sentences without any terminations prior to code blocks :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: That's a bad habit. Will fix in the next commit.

> Reducing is a way to combine all the elements of a data structure into a single value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Reduce** is a way to combine all the elements of a data structure into a single value.
```

The process iterates over the data structure, applying a function to each element to update the accumulated result.

In `jq`, this process is implemented in the [`reduce` filter][jq-man-reduce].
In other languages, it might be called "fold", "fold-left", "inject", or "aggregate".

> The `jq` `reduce` expression looks like this.
> ```jq

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jq` `reduce` expression looks like this.

```jq
```

reduce STREAM_EXPRESSION as $var (INITIAL_VALUE; UPDATE_EXPRESSION)
```

> - STREAM\_EXPRESSION is a _stream_ of items, each stored in the $var variable in turn.
>   - Recall, to stream an array, use the [iterator filter `.[]`][jq-man-iterator]: `$myArray | .[]`
> - INITIAL\_VALUE is the starting value of the accumulated result (known as the "accumulator").
> - The UPDATE\_EXPRESSION combines ("folds") the current value ($var) into the accumulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `STREAM_EXPRESSION` is a _stream_ of items, each stored in the `$var variable` in turn.
  - Recall, to stream an array, use the [iterator filter `.[]`][jq-man-iterator]: `$myArray | .[]`
- `INITIAL_VALUE` is the starting value of the accumulated result (known as the "accumulator").
- The `UPDATE_EXPRESSION` combines ("folds") the current value (`$var`) into the accumulator.
```

  - In the context of this expression, `.` is the value of the accumulator.
  - The output of the expression is stored into the accumulator for use in the next iteration.
  - After the last iteration, the accumulated result is the output of `reduce`.

> Let's look at an example -- adding up the numbers in an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at an example: adding up the numbers in an array.
```

> Of course the `add` filter is designed just for this purpose, but we'll see how to implement it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `add` filter does just this, but we'll see how to implement it.
```

> If we use `[10, 20, 30, 40]` as the input, and taking zero as the initial state, what we're going to is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we use `[10, 20, 30, 40]` as the input, and taking zero as the initial state, this is what each step looks like.
```

| \# | state | element | reducer | result |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 |  0 | 10 |  0 + 10 |  10 |
| 2 | 10 | 20 | 10 + 20 |  30 |
| 3 | 30 | 30 | 30 + 30 |  60 |
| 4 | 60 | 40 | 60 + 40 | 100 |

In `jq` syntax, this looks like

```jq
0 + 10 | . + 20 | . + 30 | . + 40
```

Expressed with the `reduce` filter we have

```jq
[10, 20, 30, 40] | reduce .[] as $n (0; . + $n)     # => 100
```

~~~~exercism/note
The `add` builtin is actually [implemented with `reduce`][jq-code-add], but uses "null" as the initial state (any data type can be added to null).

```jq
def add: reduce .[] as $x (null; . + $x);
```
~~~~

## Some things to keep in mind

- In the reducing expression, `.` is the accumulator.

>   If the input is some object that you need to reference inside the reducing function, you'll want to store it in a variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the input is some object that you need to reference inside the reducing function, you need to store it in a variable.
```

# About

Suppose we want to sum an array of numbers.
There are many ways to accomplish this goal.

- In many languages, this problem is expressed as a loop with an accumulator variable.
- This problem can be written as a recursive function.
  In pseudo-code, we might have this.

>   ```none

Reviewer: Completely as an aside, this `none` got me wondering if there was some sort of pseudocode standards/"language" for syntax highlighting. That led me to [this standard](https://users.csc.calpoly.edu/~jdalbey/SWE/pdl_std.html) and [this pseudocode language](https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Pseudocode/Gaddis_Pseudocode) (is that an oxymoron?). I'm not sure if Wikipedia has some sort of standard or whatnot for pseudocode highlighting.

  function add(x, sum=0):
    if x is empty
      return sum
    else
      return add(rest(x), sum + first(x))
  ```

  This method of dividing the problem into smaller pieces can also be described as "reducing towards the base case."

**Reduce** is a way to combine all the elements of a data structure into a single value.
The process iterates over the data structure, applying a function to each element to update the accumulated result.

In `jq`, this process is implemented in the [`reduce` filter][jq-man-reduce].
In other languages, it might be called "fold", "fold-left", "inject", or "aggregate".

The `jq` `reduce` expression looks like this.

```jq
reduce STREAM_EXPRESSION as $var (INITIAL_VALUE; UPDATE_EXPRESSION)
```

> - `STREAM_EXPRESSION` is a _stream_ of items, each stored in the `$var variable` in turn.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `STREAM_EXPRESSION` is a _stream_ of items, each stored in the `$var` variable in turn.
```

>   - Recall, to stream an array, use the [iterator filter `.[]`][jq-man-iterator]: `$myArray | .[]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Recall, to stream an array, use the [iterator filter `.[]`][jq-man-iterator]: `$myArray | .[]`.
```

- `INITIAL_VALUE` is the starting value of the accumulated result (known as the "accumulator").
- The `UPDATE_EXPRESSION` combines ("folds") the current value (`$var`) into the accumulator.
  - In the context of this expression, `.` is the value of the accumulator.
  - The output of the expression is stored into the accumulator for use in the next iteration.
  - After the last iteration, the accumulated result is the output of `reduce`.

Let's look at an example: adding up the numbers in an array.
The `add` filter does just this, but we'll see how to implement it.

If we use `[10, 20, 30, 40]` as the input, and taking zero as the initial state, this is what each step looks like.

| \# | state | element | reducer | result |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 |  0 | 10 |  0 + 10 |  10 |
| 2 | 10 | 20 | 10 + 20 |  30 |
| 3 | 30 | 30 | 30 + 30 |  60 |
| 4 | 60 | 40 | 60 + 40 | 100 |

> In `jq` syntax, this looks like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `jq` syntax, that looks like this code.
```

```jq
0 + 10 | . + 20 | . + 30 | . + 40
```

> Expressed with the `reduce` filter we have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can express that with the `reduce` filter.
```
